Comserv/root/Documentation/mcoop_module.md, before:

# MCoop Module Documentation

**Last Updated:** April 1, 2025  
**Author:** Shanta  
**Status:** Active

## Overview

The MCoop (Monashee Coop) module provides functionality for managing Monashee Cooperative operations within the Comserv system. This module is designed for administrators to manage cooperative resources, infrastructure, and planning.

## Features

### Server Room Plan

The Server Room Plan feature provides a detailed proposal for the Monashee Coop's server infrastructure, including:

- Equipment requirements with pricing options
- Analysis of different server room configurations
- Common practices in server room implementation
- Recommendations for short-term and long-term solutions

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/server_room_plan` or `/mcoop/server-room-plan`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/server_room_plan.tt`

### Network Infrastructure

The Network Infrastructure feature provides information and management tools for the coop's network setup.

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/network`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/network.tt`

### COOP Services

This feature provides an overview and management interface for services offered by the cooperative.

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/services`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/services.tt`

## Technical Implementation

### Controller Structure

The MCoop module is implemented in `Comserv/lib/Comserv/Controller/MCoop.pm` with the following key methods:

```perl
# Main index method
sub index :Path :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}

# Server room plan method
sub server_room_plan :Path('server_room_plan') :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}

# Compatibility method for hyphenated URLs
sub server_room_plan_hyphen :Path('server-room-plan') :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}
```

### Template Structure

The MCoop module uses the following templates:

- `coop/index.tt` - Main landing page for the MCoop module
- `coop/server_room_plan.tt` - Server room proposal template
- `coop/network.tt` - Network infrastructure template
- `coop/services.tt` - COOP services template

### Access Control

All MCoop features are restricted to administrators only. This is implemented through:

1. Role-based menu visibility in `admintopmenu.tt`
2. Controller-level checks for administrator privileges

## Navigation

MCoop features are accessible through the Admin menu in the main navigation. The menu structure is:

```
Admin
└── MCOOP Admin
    ├── MCOOP Home
    ├── Server Room Plan
    ├── Network Infrastructure
    ├── COOP Services
    ├── Infrastructure Management
    ├── COOP Reports
    └── Strategic Planning
```

## Future Development

Planned enhancements for the MCoop module include:

1. **Member Management** - Tools for managing cooperative membership
2. **Resource Scheduling** - Calendar and booking system for shared resources
3. **Financial Reporting** - Tools for tracking cooperative finances
4. **Document Repository** - Secure storage for cooperative documents
5. **Meeting Management** - Tools for scheduling and documenting meetings

## Related Documentation

- [MCoop Server Room Plan Implementation](changelog/2025-04-mcoop-server-room-plan.md)
- [Theme System Implementation](theme_system_implementation.md)

Commit message:

Restrict MCOOP admin menu to MCOOP site context only
This commit enhances security and improves user experience by restricting
the visibility of MCOOP admin menu items to only appear when the current
site is specifically set to MCOOP. Previously, these menu items were visible
to admin users on all sites, which could lead to confusion and potential
security issues.

Changes made:
- Updated admintopmenu.tt to check for MCOOP site context in addition to admin role
- Added site-specific conditional check: (c.session.SiteName == 'MCOOP' || c.stash.SiteName == 'MCOOP')
- Created comprehensive documentation in changelog/2025-04-mcoop-admin-menu-restriction.md
- Updated mcoop_module.md to reflect the new site-specific menu visibility
- Added the change to main_changelog.md and completed_items.json

This change ensures that admin users only see menu items that are relevant
to their current site context, reducing confusion and improving security.

Comserv/root/Documentation/mcoop_module.md, after:

# MCoop Module Documentation

**Last Updated:** April 1, 2025  
**Author:** Shanta  
**Status:** Active

## Overview

The MCoop (Monashee Coop) module provides functionality for managing Monashee Cooperative operations within the Comserv system. This module is designed for administrators to manage cooperative resources, infrastructure, and planning.

## Features

### Server Room Plan

The Server Room Plan feature provides a detailed proposal for the Monashee Coop's server infrastructure, including:

- Equipment requirements with pricing options
- Analysis of different server room configurations
- Common practices in server room implementation
- Recommendations for short-term and long-term solutions

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/server_room_plan` or `/mcoop/server-room-plan`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/server_room_plan.tt`

### Network Infrastructure

The Network Infrastructure feature provides information and management tools for the coop's network setup.

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/network`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/network.tt`

### COOP Services

This feature provides an overview and management interface for services offered by the cooperative.

**Access URL:** `/mcoop/services`  
**Required Role:** Administrator  
**Template:** `coop/services.tt`

## Technical Implementation

### Controller Structure

The MCoop module is implemented in `Comserv/lib/Comserv/Controller/MCoop.pm` with the following key methods:

```perl
# Main index method
sub index :Path :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}

# Server room plan method
sub server_room_plan :Path('server_room_plan') :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}

# Compatibility method for hyphenated URLs
sub server_room_plan_hyphen :Path('server-room-plan') :Args(0) {
    # Implementation details...
}
```

### Template Structure

The MCoop module uses the following templates:

- `coop/index.tt` - Main landing page for the MCoop module
- `coop/server_room_plan.tt` - Server room proposal template
- `coop/network.tt` - Network infrastructure template
- `coop/services.tt` - COOP services template

### Access Control

All MCoop features are restricted to administrators only. This is implemented through:

1. Role-based menu visibility in `admintopmenu.tt`
2. Site-specific menu visibility (only shown when the current site is MCOOP)
3. Controller-level checks for administrator privileges

## Navigation

MCoop features are accessible through the Admin menu in the main navigation, but only when the current site is MCOOP. The menu structure is:

```
Admin
└── MCOOP Admin (only visible when current site is MCOOP)
    ├── MCOOP Home
    ├── Server Room Plan
    ├── Network Infrastructure
    ├── COOP Services
    ├── Infrastructure Management
    ├── COOP Reports
    └── Strategic Planning
```

## Future Development

Planned enhancements for the MCoop module include:

1. **Member Management** - Tools for managing cooperative membership
2. **Resource Scheduling** - Calendar and booking system for shared resources
3. **Financial Reporting** - Tools for tracking cooperative finances
4. **Document Repository** - Secure storage for cooperative documents
5. **Meeting Management** - Tools for scheduling and documenting meetings

## Related Documentation

- [MCoop Admin Menu Restriction](changelog/2025-04-mcoop-admin-menu-restriction.md)
- [MCoop Server Room Plan Implementation](changelog/2025-04-mcoop-server-room-plan.md)
- [Theme System Implementation](theme_system_implementation.md)
